The real cause of most wildfires? People

Source: NPR (text edition) - https://text.npr.org/nx-s1-5944328
Retrieved: 2026-08-28

The Hawk Fire that's been threatening Reno, Nevada is the latest destructive wildfire in the West in recent weeks that investigators believe was human-caused.

That moniker fits a larger pattern: Federal data show that more than three-quarters of all the wildfires in the U.S. tend to be started by people, whether through negligence such as a campfire that wasn't fully extinguished, a downed power line or deliberate arson.

"There are more people living in fire prone landscapes every year and every one of those people is a potential ignition source," says Kelly Pohl, a researcher at Headwaters Economics, a Montana-based think tank.

Recent studies in California show human-caused fires are almost always more dangerous than natural blazes: think of the power lines that ignited the deadly Eaton Fire in Los Angeles County or the Camp Fire in Paradise in rural northern California.

Federal data compiled by Headwaters Economics also show that arson, while generally trending downward since the 1990s, is still a big problem, too.

Authorities in Spokane, Washington arrested 37-year-old Aaron Farinacci for allegedly starting the Old Trails Fire in early August, which became one of the most destructive wildfires in that state's history.

Court documents show Farinacci later told police he started more than two dozen wildfires including Old Trails. Authorities say he watched fire weather apps and waited for conditions where he could do the most damage. That weekend there were dire warnings about extreme heat and wind across the Northwest.

"The origin of the fire was indeed exactly where the witnesses had seen Mr. Farinacci kneeling in the grass earlier that day," said John Nowels, Spokane county sheriff, at a news conference announcing the arrest.

Farinacci now faces additional arson charges for four other wildfires last year around Spokane. In Reno, investigators are still trying to pinpoint the exact cause of the Hawk Fire, saying only so far that they believe it's human-caused.

Like much of the West, both cities have seen considerable growth in recent decades out into what fire managers call the wildland urban interface. Whatever the ignition source, Pohl says people tend to start wildfires in or near populated areas.

"More people are moving into these places," she says. "So growth alone can drive up human-caused ignitions."

While they tend to ignite in more remote forests, natural wildfires can still be incredibly destructive as well. Most of the 2.3 million acres burned in Oregon so far this summer were fires sparked by lightning strikes. Andrés Holz, a climate scientist at Portland State University, says it's also just hotter now in the American West.

"In the background, we have climate change that makes vegetation drier," Holz says. "So now we have a longer season where fuels are a lot drier than before."

Wildland firefighters have gotten remarkably effective at containing most human-caused fires. It's the small fraction that escape that dominate headlines. Researchers also point to better public awareness today about fire risks as another factor keeping most fires small. Holz says globally the number of human-caused ignitions is actually trending downward, "which is hard to believe because we see the news and we see these outliers which are super severe and catastrophic."

In Spokane, fire survivors like Chris Matthews are left struggling to process how someone could have deliberately started the blaze that ravaged their city . Hundreds of homes burned in the Old Trails Fire, including his. His family lost everything but the car they escaped the flames in.

"I really want to understand why people would do something like that," Matthews says. "I just don't understand."

ADRIAN FLORIDO, HOST: In Reno, Nevada, firefighters are making good progress slowing a wildfire that's burned more than 40 homes and forced tens of thousands of people to evacuate. In the West, it's just the latest destructive fire that investigators believe was human-caused. As NPR's Kirk Siegler reports, these blazes are often more destructive than natural fires. KIRK SIEGLER, BYLINE: Just a few days after the Old Trails Fire burned down hundreds of homes in Spokane County, Washington, the sheriff, John Nowels, hastily called a press conference to announce they believe the fire was deliberately set. (SOUNDBITE OF PRESS CONFERENCE) JOHN NOWELS: And we took 37-year-old Aaron Farinacci, a convicted felon, into custody on a single charge of arson in the first degree. SIEGLER: Court documents show Farinacci later told police he started more than two dozen wildfires, including Old Trails. Authorities say he watched fire weather apps and waited for conditions where he could do the most damage. That weekend, there were dire warnings about extreme heat and wind across the Northwest. (SOUNDBITE OF PRESS CONFERENCE) NOWELS: The origin of the fire was indeed exactly where the witnesses had seen Mr. Farinacci kneeling in the grass earlier that day. SIEGLER: Farinacci now faces additional arson charges for four other wildfires last year around Spokane. All of this fits into an alarming bigger story. Federal data shows that more than three-quarters of all wildfires in the U.S. are caused by people, be it arson or outright negligence, like burn piles or a campfire that's not fully put out. Kelly Pohl is with the Montana-based think tank Headwaters Economics. KELLY POHL: Your car, your lawnmower, a campfire, a downed power line in a new subdivision, those can all be drivers of wildfire ignitions, and they happen where there are people. SIEGLER: And Pohl says people tend to start wildfires in or near populated areas. POHL: And more people are moving into these places, so growth alone can drive up the human-caused ignitions. SIEGLER: Studies in California show human-caused fires are almost always more dangerous. Think the power lines that ignited the deadly Eaton Fire in LA County or the campfire in Paradise. Andres Holz is a climate scientist at Portland State University. He says it's also just hotter now. ANDRES HOLZ: Now we have, of course, in the background, we have climate change that makes vegetation - we call it fuels - to be drier than historically. And so now we have a longer season where fuels are a lot drier than before. SIEGLER: But natural-cause fires can also be really destructive. Most of the 2.3 million acres burned in Oregon this summer were from lightning strikes. But in the bigger picture, wildland firefighters have gotten really good at putting out most fires. Researchers say there is also better public awareness today about the risks. Holz says globally the number of human-caused ignitions is actually trending downward. HOLZ: Which is hard to believe 'cause we see the news and we see these extreme outliers that are super severe and catastrophic. SIEGLER: Catastrophic fires like in Reno and Spokane this month. Authorities in Reno have said only that they believe the Hawk Fire is human-caused. Spokane fire victims like Chris Matthews are left struggling to process how someone could have deliberately started a fire that ravaged their city. CHRIS MATTHEWS: I don't understand the rationale. I really want to understand why people would do something like that. SIEGLER: Matthews lost everything except for the one car his family evacuated in. Hundreds of homes burned, including theirs. MATTHEWS: You see there... UNIDENTIFIED PERSON: Yeah (ph). MATTHEWS: ...Where that mailbox is right there? Our home was on the end there. SIEGLER: It's a total loss, he says. A loss that authorities believe was preventable were it not for an arsonist. Kirk Siegler, NPR News, Spokane, Washington. Topics
